.. _gkg-interfaces:

5. Interfaces
=============

Runtime Search Flow and Known Issue
------------------------------------

The code/SDLC search flow in cloud mode involves a synchronous chain through
DAP, Orbit, ClickHouse, and the Rails redaction service.  This chain
**blocks a Puma thread** for the entire duration of the request.

.. uml:: puml/gkg_search_sequence.puml
   :caption: Search flow --- query engine compilation, auth, and redaction all
             block the Puma thread

**The problem:** A search request holds a Puma thread from the moment Rails
receives it until Orbit finishes: DSL compilation (the 13-phase compiler
pipeline), the ClickHouse query, and N ``RedactionRequired`` round-trips over
the gRPC stream back to Rails for ``Ability.allowed?`` permission filtering.
(Traversal-path filtering adds no round-trip --- the allowed paths ride in the
request JWT; see :ref:`Appendix: Traversal-Path Authorization
<gkg-appendix-auth-cache>`.)  At 100x concurrency this exhausts the Puma pool
and degrades all Rails request handling --- not just search.

**Remediation path:** Move the search request to an async job (Sidekiq) or
adopt a streaming/callback pattern so the Puma thread is released immediately.
Orbit can notify Rails when results are ready.

APIs Exposed
------------

The cloud ``gkg-server`` is a **gRPC (tonic) service**.  It does not serve a
public REST or MCP surface directly --- the only HTTP endpoints it exposes are
the ``GET /live`` and ``GET /ready`` health probes.  The customer-facing REST
API and MCP endpoints live in the **Rails monolith** and proxy to ``gkg-server``
over gRPC.

**Orbit gRPC API** (``KnowledgeGraphService``, called by the Rails gRPC
client, stub-cached):

.. list-table::
   :widths: 34 66
   :header-rows: 1

   * - RPC
     - What it does
   * - ``ListTools``
     - List available agent tools
   * - ``ListAgentCommands``
     - List available agent commands
   * - ``InvokeAgentCommand``
     - Invoke a named agent command
   * - ``ExecuteQuery``
     - Execute a graph query (JSON DSL); **bidirectional streaming** ---
       carries the redaction callback (see below)
   * - ``GetGraphSchema``
     - Return the graph schema (for progressive disclosure)
   * - ``GetQueryDsl``
     - Return the query DSL definition
   * - ``GetResponseFormat``
     - Return the response format/version
   * - ``GetClusterHealth``
     - Cluster health
   * - ``GetGraphStatus``
     - Indexing / graph status

Nine RPCs in total.  ``gkg-server`` health is served over HTTP as ``GET /live``
and ``GET /ready``; there is no ``/health`` route.  Metrics are exported via
OpenTelemetry (labkit), not a ``/metrics`` HTTP route.

**Rails REST surface** (JWT-authenticated via DAP, under ``/api/v4/orbit/*``,
proxying to the gRPC service):

.. list-table::
   :widths: 34 40 26
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Endpoint
     - What it does
     - Backing RPC
   * - ``POST /api/v4/orbit/query``
     - Execute a graph query (JSON DSL)
     - ``ExecuteQuery``
   * - ``GET /api/v4/orbit/schema``
     - Return the graph schema
     - ``GetGraphSchema``
   * - ``GET /api/v4/orbit/dsl``
     - Return the query DSL definition
     - ``GetQueryDsl``
   * - ``GET /api/v4/orbit/status``
     - Graph / indexing status
     - ``GetGraphStatus``
   * - ``GET /api/v4/orbit/tools``
     - List available tools
     - ``ListTools``

**MCP:** MCP for the cloud service is exposed by **Rails** (``tools/list`` /
``tools/call``), which proxies to the gRPC service --- ``gkg-server`` itself
has no ``/mcp/`` or SSE endpoint.  The only in-repo MCP server is
``orbit-local`` (the local CLI), which speaks MCP over **stdio** (not HTTP+SSE)
and exposes the tools ``run_sql``, ``get_graph_schema``, and ``index``.

**Agent tools** (server-side tool/command registry, surfaced to LLM agents via
DAP / AI Gateway):

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Tool
     - What it does
   * - ``query_graph``
     - Execute a JSON DSL query against the graph.  Agents construct their own
       queries against the schema (progressive disclosure keeps token usage
       around 3k).
   * - ``get_graph_schema``
     - Return the graph schema for progressive disclosure.
   * - ``list_commands``
     - List available agent commands (the discovery half of the fallback
       pattern).
   * - ``invoke_command``
     - Invoke a named agent command (the execution half of the fallback
       pattern).

For desktop server APIs, see
:ref:`Appendix: Desktop Mode <gkg-appendix-desktop>`.

APIs Consumed
-------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 22 18 35 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - API
     - Source
     - What it does
     - Key parameters
   * - ClickHouse query
     - ClickHouse Cloud
     - Read/write code + SDLC property graph tables
     - Parameterized SQL (generated by query engine)
   * - Redaction (gRPC stream)
     - Rails monolith
     - ``Ability.allowed?`` batch permission check via ``RedactionRequired``
       over the ``ExecuteQuery`` bidirectional stream
     - resource_type + abilities (default ``"read"``) per result batch
   * - Gitaly fetch
     - Gitaly
     - Source code download (streaming archive, incremental)
     - Project path, commit SHA
   * - Internal API
     - Rails monolith
     - Gitaly access credentials
     - Project context

Events Published
----------------

**Billing events:**

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 30 25 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Event
     - What it does
     - Key payload fields
     - Consumer
   * - Query credit consumption
     - Emitted per customer-driven query
     - Tenant, query type, credit amount
     - Snowplow -> CDot


Events Consumed
---------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 22 18 35 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Event
     - Source
     - What it does
     - Module response
   * - SDLC CDC events
     - Siphon via NATS JetStream
     - Entity change notifications (work items, MRs, pipelines, etc.)
     - SDLC indexer consumes, transforms, writes to ClickHouse.
       Per-entity watermarks for granular retry.
   * - Code change events
     - Siphon via NATS JetStream
     - Git push / repo update notifications
     - Code indexer triggers incremental re-index from Gitaly.
       Rename detection for file moves.

Bulk Data Flows
---------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 22 12 38 28
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Flow
     - Direction
     - What it moves
     - Volume and frequency
   * - SDLC CDC replication
     - PG -> Siphon -> NATS -> Orbit -> CH
     - SDLC entities (work items, MRs, pipelines, vulnerabilities, users,
       groups, projects, milestones, labels, notes)
     - Continuous CDC stream; keyset pagination for large tables
   * - Code indexing
     - Gitaly -> Orbit -> CH
     - Source files, parsed into graph nodes and edges
     - Full repo on first index; incremental on push events
   * - Graph query
     - Orbit <-> CH
     - Parameterized SQL queries and result sets
     - Per search request; SIP + keyset pagination for performance
   * - Redaction batches
     - Orbit <-> Rails (gRPC stream)
     - ``RedactionRequired`` resource batches for permission check
     - Per search request; multiple round-trips per query

Graph Query Engine --- Four Query Types
----------------------------------------

The JSON DSL supports four query types, all compiled to parameterized
ClickHouse SQL through the 13-phase compiler pipeline:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Description
   * - **Traversal**
     - Walk the graph N hops from a starting node, following specified edge
       types.  Edge-centric traversal with SIP optimization.  Full-text
       **search** is a *mode* of traversal (matching node properties such as
       definitions and names), not a separate query type.
   * - **Aggregation**
     - Count, group, and summarize graph data (e.g., "work items by label per
       project").
   * - **Pathfinding**
     - Find paths between two nodes through the graph.
   * - **Neighbors** (nearest neighbors)
     - Find nodes most similar to a given node by graph distance or property
       similarity.
